# Algorithms, 4th Edition by Robert Sedgewick

----
## 1.3 Bags, Queues, and Stacks

----
### APIs
The following represent standard APIs for bags, stacks, and queues, all containing a no-argument constructor.
```java
/* Bag */
public class Bag<Item> implements Iterable<Item>
           Bag()              // creates an empty bag
     void  add(Item item)     // add an item
  boolean  isEmpty()          // is the bag empty?
      int  size()             // number of items in the bag

/* FIFO queue */
public class Queue<Item> implements Iterable<Item>
           Queue()            // creates an empty queue
     void  enqueue(Item item) // add an item
     Item  dequeue()          // remove the least recently added item
  boolean  isEmpty()          // is the queue empty?
      int  size()             // number of items in the queue      

/* Pushdown (LIFO) stack */
public class Stack<Item> implements Iterable<Item>
           Stack()            // creates an empty stack
     void  push(Item item)    // add an item
     Item  pop()              // remove the most recently added item
  boolean  isEmpty()          // is the stack empty?
      int  size()             // number of items in the stack
```

----
### Bags
A bag is a collection where removing items is not supported - its purpose is to provide clients with the ability to collect items and then to iterate through the collected items (the client can also test if a bag is empty and find its number of items). The order of iteration is unspecified and should be immaterial to the client.

```js
// implementation of bags


```

----
### FIFO queues
Typically used to save items in a collection while at the same time *preserving their relative order*: they come out in the same order in which they were put in.

```js
// implementation of queues


```

----
### Pushdown stacks
Based on the *last-in first out* (LIFO) policy, stacks are used to save items in a collection while at the same time *reversing* their relative order.

```js
// implementation of stacks


```

#### Dijkstra's Two-Stack Algorithm for Expression Evaluation
Input: `string` of a mathematical expression, e.g. `'(1 + ((2 + 3) * (4 * 5)))'`  
Ouput: the number represented by that expression, e.g. `101`  

Algorithm: Use two stacks, one for operands and one for operators.  
1. Push *operands* into the operand stack
2. Push *operators* into the operator stack
3. Ignore *left* parentheses
4. On encountering a *right* paranthesis, pop an operator, pop the requisite number of operands, and push onto the operand stack the result of applying that operator to those operands

----
### Linked Lists
To avoid having to resize arrays to represent the abstract data types of stacks and queues (especially in Java), a linked list can be used. A linked list is a recursive data structure that is either empty (*null*) or a reference to a *node* having a generic item and a reference to a linked list.  

Operations that can be easily handled by a linked list:
1. Insert at the beginning
2. Remove from the beginning
3. Insert at the end

Other operations which are not so easily handled:
1. Remove a given node
2. Insert a new node before a given node

Traversal involves starting at the first `Node`, `x`, accessing the item associated with `x` by accessing `x.item`, then updating `x` to refer to the next `Node` in the linked list, assigning it to the value of `x.next`, and repeating this process until `x` is null.  
```js
for (Node x = first; x !== null; x = x.next) {
  // Process x.item
}
```

#### Stack Implementation
The top of a stack is represented by the beginning of a linked list, and is reference by an instance variable `first`. To `push()` an item, we add it to the beginning of the list, and to `pop()` an item, we remove it from the beginning of the list. To implement `size()`, we keep track of the number of items in an instance variable `N`, incrementing `N` when we `push` and decrementing N when we `pop`. To implement `isEmpty()` we check whether `first` is `null` (alternatively, whether `N` is 0).

#### Queue Implementation
Linked lists maintain a queue in order from least recently to most recently added items, with the beginning of the queue referenced by an instance variable `first` and the end of the queue referenced by an instance variable `last`. To `enqueue()` an item, we add it to the end of the list (when list is empty, we set both `first` and `last` to refer to the new node). To `dequeue()` an item, we remove it from the beginning of the list (using the same method as `pop()` in `Stack`, augmented to update `last` when the list becomes empty. `size()` and `isEmpty()` can be implemented in the same way as `Stack`.

#### Bag Implementation
Simply rename the `push()` method in `Stack` to `add()` and remove the implementation of `pop()`.