# Algorithms, 4th Edition by Robert Sedgewick

---
## 2.1 Elementary Sorts

---
### Sorting Analysis
Regarding memory considerations, sorting algorithms divide into two basic types: those that sort *in place* and use no extra memory except perhaps for a small function-call stack or a constant number of instance variables, and those that need enough extra memory to hold another copy of the array to be sorted.

---
### Selection Sort
First, find the smallest item in the array and exchange it with the first entry. Then, find the next smallest item and exchange it with the second array. Continue until the array is sorted. This method is named selection sort because it repeatedly *selects* the smallest remaining item.  

Analysis: Uses *~N^2 / 2* compares and *N* exchanges to sort an array of length *N*. This is non-sensitive to the input.

```js
const selectionSort = (arr) => {
  for (let i = 0; i < arr.length - 1; i++) {
    let min = i;

    for (let j = i + 1; j < arr.length; j++) {
      // Find the minimum value in the unsorted sub-array
      if (arr[j] < arr[min]) {
        min = j;
      }
    }

    // Swap minimum element with the i'th element to maintain sorted sub-array
    [arr[i], arr[min]] = [arr[min], arr[i]];
  }

  return arr;
};

```

---
### Insertion Sort
Consider each item one at a time, inserting each into its proper place among those to be considered (keeping the sorted sub-array sorted). We need to make space to insert the current item by moving larger items one position to the right, before inserting the current item into the vacated position.  

Analysis: The running time of insertion sort dependds on the initial order of the items in the input (unlike selection sort). On average, insertion sort uses *~N^2 / 4* compares and *~N^2 / 4* exchanges to sort a randomly ordered array of length *N* with distinct keys. The worst case is *N^2 / 2* compares and *~N^2 / 2* exchanges, and the best case is *N - 1* compares and *0* exchanges. It is possible to further speed up the algorithm by shortening its inner loop to move the larger entries to the right one position rather than doing full exchanges (thus cutting the number of array accesses in half). Insertion sort is also approximately twice as fast as selection sort in practice.  

An **inversion** is a pair of entries that are out of order in the array. If the number of inversions in an array is less than c onstant multiple of the array size, we say that the array is *partially sorted*. Insertion sort is an efficient method for such arrays, while selection sort is not.

```js
const insertionSort = (arr) => {
  for (let i = 1; i < arr.length; i++) {
    for (let j = i; j > 0; j--) {
      if (arr[j] < arr[j - 1]) {
        // If the element on the left is greater, swap the pair
        [arr[j], arr[j - 1]] = [arr[j - 1], arr[j]];
      }
    }
  }

  return arr;
};

```

---
### Shell Sort
An extension of insertion sort that gains speed by allowing exchanges of array entries that are far apart, to produce partially sorted arrays that can be efficienty sorted, eventually by insertion sort.  

Idea: Rearrange the array to give it the property that taking every *h*th entry (starting anywhere) yields a sorted subsequence. Such an array is said to be *h*-sorted (i.e. containing *h* independent sorted subsequences, interleaved together). By *h*-sorting for some large values of *h*, we can move items in the array long distances and thus make it easier to *h*-sort for smaller values of *h*. Using such a procedure for any sequence of values of *h* that ends in 1 will produce a sorted array.  

Implementation: First, determine a sequence of decreasing values (a common implementation is to use the sequence of decreasing values *1/2(3^k - 1)*, starting at the smallest increment greater than or equal to *N/3* and decreasing to 1. This is called an **increment sequence**. Implementation involves using insertion sort independently on each of the *h* subsequences for each *h*. Because the subsequences are independent, we can use a simpler approach: when *h*-sorting the array, we insert each item among the previous items in its *h*-subsequence by exchanging it with those that have larger keys (moving them each one position to the right in the subsequence). We accomplish this task using the same insertion-sort code, but decrementing by *h* instead of 1 when moving through the array. This observation reduces the shellsort implementation to an insertion-sort-like pass through the array for each increment.  

Analysis: Shellsort gains efficiency by making a tradeoff between size and partial order in the subsequences. At the beginning, subsequences are short, and later in the sort, the subsequences are partially sorted. The running time of shellsort is not well defined, but it is sufficient to know that it is *not necessarily quadratic*, and it is known that the worst-case number of compares using this increment sequence is proportial to *N^(3/2*). Shellsort is often used because it has acceptable running time even for moderately large arrays; it requires a small amount of code; and it uses no extra space.

```js
const shellSort = (arr) => {
  /*
   * Generate the increment sequence needed to incrementally h-sort the array
   * by using Knuth's formula: 3x + 1. We want to start at the largest h that
   * is less than our file size, and do decreasing sorts starting from that
   * increment. Knuth's formula will generate the following sequence:
   * 1, 4, 13, 40, 121, 364, ...
   */
  let h = 1;
  while (h < arr.length / 3) {
    h = 3 * h + 1;
  }

  while (h >= 1) {
    // h-sort the array
    for (let i = h; i < arr.length; i++) {
      /*
       * For each h, starting at h, we want to compare every subsequent element
       * to the elements in c*h positions behind it, where c is a some constant
       * that starts at 1 and continues while c*h remains within the bounds of
       * the array. Using the insertion sort implementation, we then swap the
       * element with the element at i - c*h if they are not in the right order
       */
      for (let j = i; j >= h; j -= h) {
        if (arr[j] < arr[j - h]) {
          [arr[j], arr[j - h]] = [arr[j - h], arr[j]];
        }
      }
    }

    // Move to the next increment
    h = Math.floor(h / 3);
  }

  return arr;
};

```

---
### Knuth Shuffle
In iteration *i*, pick integer *rnd* between *0* and *i* uniformly at random. Swap *a[i]* and *a[rnd]*. The Knuth shuffling algorithm produces a uniformly random permutation of the input array in linear time [Fisher-Yates 1938].

```js
const knuthShuffle = (arr) => {
  for (let i = 0; i < arr.length; i++) {
    // Generate a random number between 0 and i
    let rnd = Math.floor((Math.random() * (i + 1)));

    // Swap the element in position i with the element in position rnd
    [arr[i], arr[rnd]] = [arr[rnd], arr[i]];
  }

  return arr;
};

```