# Algorithms, 4th Edition by Robert Sedgewick

---
## 2.2 Mergesort

---
### Mergesort
The mergesort algorithm is based on a simple operation known as *merging*: combining two ordered arrays to make one larger ordered array. This operation immediately leads to a simple recursive sort method known as *mergesort*: to sort an array, divide it into two halves, sort the two halves (recursively), and then merge the results.  

Analysis: The attractiveness of this algorithm is that it guarantees to sort any array of *N* items in time proportional to *N log N*. However, its primary disadvantage is that it uses extra space proportional to *N*.

---
### Top-down Mergesort
To sort a subarray `a[low...hi]` we divide it into two parts: `a[low..mid]` and `a[mid+1..hi]`, sort them independently (via recursive calls), and merge the resulting ordered subarrays to produce the result. The recursive calls break the sub-arrays into smaller sub-arrays until they are of size 2, with which the elements can then be merged in the order: `[low, high]`.

```js
/*
 * Top-down mergesort implementation
 * (includes testing if two sub-arrays are already in order)
 */

const fs = require('fs');

const merge = (arr, low, mid, high) => {
  // Copy arr[low..high] into auxiliary array, aux[low..high]
  let aux = [];
  for (let k = low; k <= high; k++) {
    aux[k] = arr[k];
  }

  let i = low;
  let j = mid + 1;

  // Merge the two sub-arrays of the auxiliary array back into the main array
  for (let k = low; k <= high; k++) {
    if (i > mid) {
      // Left half is exhausted, take from right sub-array and increment j
      arr[k] = aux[j++];
    } else if (j > high) {
      // Right half is exhausted, take from left sub-array and increment i
      arr[k] = aux[i++];
    } else if (aux[i] < aux[j]) {
      // Element on the left smaller than element on the right, take from left
      arr[k] = aux[i++];
    } else {
      // Element on left greater or equal to element on right, take from right
      arr[k] = aux[j++];
    }
  }
};

const mergesort = (arr, low=0, high=arr.length - 1) => {
  if (low >= high) { // No more elements left to sort
    return;
  }

  let mid = Math.floor((low + high) / 2);
  mergesort(arr, low, mid); // Sort the left half of the array
  mergesort(arr, mid + 1, high); // Sort the right half of the array

  // Before executing a merge, observe if the two arrays are already sorted
  if (arr[mid] < arr[mid + 1]) {
    return;
  }

  merge(arr, low, mid, high); // Merge the results

  return arr;
};

```

---
### Bottom-up Mergesort
Another way to implement mergesort is to organize the merges so that we do all the merges of tiny subarrays on one pass, then do a second pass to merge those subarrays in pairs, and so forth, continuing until we do a merge that encompasses the whole array. In other words, starting at `sz = 1`, we do `sz`-by-`sz` merges, doubling `sz` on each pass.

```js
/*
 * Bottom-up mergesort
 */

const fs = require('fs');
const merge = require('./mergesort').merge;

const mergesortBU = (arr) => {
  let N = arr.length;

  for (let size = 1; size < N; size += size) {
    // Only log N number of passes because we are doubling size each time
    for (let low = 0; low < N - size; low += 2*size) {
      // low = 0, 2, 4, 6, ...; low = 0, 4, 8, 12...

      /*
       * Merge 2 n-sized arrays together. For example, if size = 2, merge
       * is called on low = 0, mid = 1, high = 3,
       * then called on low = 4, mid = 5, high = 7, until the limit N-1.
       */
      merge(arr, low, low + size-1, Math.min(low + 2*size - 1, N-1));
    }
  }

  return arr;
};

```

---
### Optimizations
1. Use insertion sort for small subarrays - insertion sort is simpler and likely to be faster than mergesort for tiny subarrays. Implementing mergesort with a cutoff for small subarrays will improve the running time of a typical mergesort implementation by 10% - 15%.
2. Test whether the array is already in order - we can reduce the running time to be linear for arrays that are already in order by adding a test to skip the call to `merge()` if `a[mid]` is less than or equal to `a[mid+1]`. With this change, we still do all the recursive calls, but the running tiem for any sorted subarray is linear.

---
### Sorting Complexity
Given *N* distinct keys, there exist *N!* different permutations. If we were to represent these permutations in the form of a binary tree, the number of internal nodes on a path from the root to a leaf on the tree is the number of compares used by the algorithm for some input. We are interested in the length of the longest such path in the tree (which is equal to the tree *height*) because this represents the worst-case number of compares used by the algorithm. Because *h* is the worst-case number of compares, we can take the logarithm (base 2) of *N!* worst-case number of leavves, and conclude that the number of compares used by any algorithm must be at least *lg (N!)*. The approximation of *lg (N!) ~ N lg N* follows immediately from Stirling's approximation to the factorial function. Therefore, no sorting function can achieve better than *N lg N* worst-case time complexity.

---
### Stability
A **stable** sort preserves the relative order of items with equal keys. Insertion sort and mergesort are stable, but not selection sort or shellsort. Even then, we need to check if we are using the `<` operator or the `<=` operator. As long as equal items never move past each other (e.g. in insertion sort), the sort is stable. Sort that are not stable typically involve some long-distance exchange that might move an item past some equal item (e.g. selection sort, shellsort).